*: replace Celery with Dramatiq (#13492)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/sys-mgmt/background-tasks.md

---
title: Background tasks
slug: /background-tasks
---

> authentik uses background tasks to run various operations independently and asynchronously from the web requests it receives. Those tasks are run by the [worker](./ops/worker.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentik uses background tasks to run various operations independently and asynchronously, separated from the continuous web requests processed for general user interaction in the product. These background tasks are run by the [worker](./ops/worker.md).
```

Author: ```suggestion
authentik uses background tasks to run various operations independently and asynchronously, separated from the continuous web requests processed for general user interaction. These background tasks are run by the [worker](./ops/worker.md).
```

## What are background tasks used for?

Here is a non-exhaustive list of what background tasks are used for:

- outposts: manage [Outposts](../add-secure-apps/outposts/index.mdx) deployments, send notifications to outpost when a refresh is needed

> - housekeeping: clean up old objects, check for updates, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Housekeeping: clean up old objects, check for updates, etc.
```

- blueprints: import and apply [Blueprints](../customize/blueprints/index.mdx)
- synchronization: sync users to and from authentik, from sources and to providers. This is used by:
    - [SCIM Provider](../add-secure-apps/providers/scim/index.md)
    - [Google Workspace Provider](../add-secure-apps/providers/gws/index.md)
    - [Microsoft Entra Provider](../add-secure-apps/providers/entra/index.md)
    - [SSF Provider](../add-secure-apps/providers/ssf/index.md)
    - [Kerberos Source](../users-sources/sources/protocols/kerberos/index.md)
    - [LDAP Source](../users-sources/sources/protocols/ldap/index.md)
- enterprise [license management](../enterprise/manage-enterprise.mdx#license-management)

> - notifications: send [Notifications](./events/notifications.md) when events are created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Event Notifications: send [Notifications](./events/notifications.md) when events are created
```

- emails: send emails when triggered by one of the email stages or otherwise

## Schedules

> Some tasks run on a schedule. Those schedules can be [configured](#schedule-configuration). Schedules can be manually triggered by clicking the play arrow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentik runs some tasks on a schedule. Those schedules can be [configured](#schedule-configuration). Schedules can be manually triggered by clicking the play arrow.
```

## Tasks statuses

A task can have the following statuses:

- **Successful**: the task executed successfully. No extra action is required.
- **Warning**: the task emitted a warning. Look at the task logs for further information. See [Failed tasks](#failed-tasks) for more details.
- **Error**: the task failed to process. Either the task threw an exception, or reported an other error. Look at the task logs for further information. See [Failed tasks](#failed-tasks) for more details.

> - **Waiting to run**: the task has been queued for running, but no worker picked it up yet, either because none are available, they are already busy, or because it's just been queued.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Waiting to run**: the task has been queued for running, but no worker has picked it up yet, either because none are available, they are already busy, or because it's just been queued.
```

- **Running**: the task is currently running.

## Manage background tasks

### View system tasks

> Tasks and schedules can be viewed and managed from the admin interface.

Reviewer: @rissson I forgot exactly what you told me about the different places to view tasks... is it correct that ALL tasks are shown on the Admin interface, and then some tasks are *also* shown in their relevant areas? Or is it one or the other place, never both?

> Tasks and schedules can be viewed and managed from the admin interface.

Reviewer: nm you answer it below on line 50 about the toggle...

> By default, tasks are shown _as close as possible_ to their relevant objects. For instance, LDAP source synchronization tasks and schedules are shown on the LDAP source detail page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, by default, tasks are shown _as close as possible_ to their relevant objects. For instance, LDAP source synchronization tasks and schedules are shown on the LDAP source detail page.
```

> When a task or a schedule cannot be associated to an object (for example housekeeping tasks), it is referred to as "standalone" and will be displayed under **Dashboards** > **System Tasks**. Note that tasks created from a schedule are associated to that schedule and are not considered standalone. Both schedule and task items can be expanded to view additional detail about them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a task or a schedule cannot be associated to an object (for example housekeeping tasks), it is referred to as "standalone" and is displayed under **Dashboards** > **System Tasks**. Note that tasks created from a schedule are associated to that schedule and are not considered standalone. Both schedule and task items can be expanded to view additional details about them.
```

> If you cannot find the object to which a task or schedule is attached to, untick "Show only standalone tasks/schedules" on the **System Tasks** page to show all tasks and schedules, including the ones that are attached to objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you cannot find the object to which a task or schedule is attached, deselect the "Show only standalone tasks/schedules" toggle on the **System Tasks** page to show all tasks and schedules, including the ones that are attached to objects.
```

> By default, successful tasks are hidden to minimize the number of shown items. Untick "Exclude successful tasks" to show them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, successful tasks are hidden to minimize the number of shown items. Deslect "Exclude successful tasks" to display them.
```

### Schedule configuration

> When schedules are created, they are assigned a default interval. To change that interval, edit the schedule and update it. The format is a crontab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the authentik system creates a schedule it is assigned a default interval. The schedule uses a format based on [unix-cron](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/crontab.5.html).

To change that interval, click the Edit icon beside the name of the schedule and update it. 
```

:::warning

> Some tasks are required to run at regular intervals. We only recommend editing synchronization schedules intervals for tuning reasons.

Reviewer: @rissson is my rewrite still technically correct??

:::

> Schedules can also be paused to prevent new tasks to be created from them. They can still be triggered manually while paused. When un-pausing a schedule, it will be triggered immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schedules can also be _paused_ to prevent new tasks to be created from them. They can still be triggered manually while paused. When you un-pause a schedule, it will be triggered immediately.
```

### Failed tasks

> When a task fails, i.e. when the code throws an exception, the task will be retried up to the value configured in [`AUTHENTIK_WORKER__TASK_MAX_RETRIES`](../install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx#authentik_worker__task_max_retries). Tasks that self-reported an error or a warning will not be retried.

Reviewer: @risson, let's make it clear whether that value is inclusive or exclusive... Say the value is four... is it retried three times then fails on fourth, or retried 4 times then fails on the fifth time?

Reviewer: @dominic-r was the same place that you had a question about this? ORrwas that a diff feature?

Reviewer 2: No, it was for webauthn max retries QA

Failed tasks will be displayed as any other tasks. Each task can be expanded to show its logs. The logs are split into two parts: "Current execution logs" for the current execution, and "Previous execution logs" for logs from previous execution that happened before a retry was initiated. The information contained in the logs will point to a transient error (a network connection failed for example), a mis-configuration (wrong password set in the LDAP source for example) or a bug in authentik.

#### Restarting tasks

> To restart a task, click the retry arrow next to the task. It will be queued again and picked up by a worker.

Reviewer: @rissson is this about tasks that failed, and you want to restart them, or about tasks that were paused? Also, by "retry arrow" do you mean the Run arrow, under the Actions column?

Author: Perfect

> To restart a task, click the retry arrow next to the task. It will be queued again and picked up by a worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restart a task, click the arrow for the task to expand the details for that task and then click the Retry icon (icon.svg) next to the task. It will be queued again and picked up by a worker.
```

Author: Well, the retry icon doesn't need the task to be expanded. And it has nothing to do with schedules.

Reviewer: Ah, so they are on the Tasks tab... not the schedules tab.

:::info

> To retry tasks created from a schedule, we recommend manually triggering the schedule instead of restarting one of its tasks.

Reviewer: How does one "manually trigger the schedule"? And by "restart" do we mean with the Retry option?

Author: by clicking the Run arrow beside the schedule

> And by "restart" do we mean with the Retry option?

yes

- **Error**: the task failed to process. Either the task threw an exception, or reported an other error. Look at the task logs for further information. See [Failed tasks](#failed-tasks) for more details.
- **Waiting to run**: the task has been queued for running, but no worker has picked it up yet, either because none are available, they are already busy, or because it's just been queued.
- **Running**: the task is currently running.

## Manage background tasks

### View system tasks

You can view and manage all background tasks and schedules from the Admin interface.

However, by default, tasks are shown _as close as possible_ to their relevant objects. For instance, LDAP source synchronization tasks and schedules are shown on the LDAP source detail page.

When a task or a schedule cannot be associated to an object (for example, housekeeping tasks), it is referred to as "standalone" and is displayed under **Dashboards** > **System Tasks**. Note that tasks created from a schedule are associated to that schedule and thus are not considered standalone. Both schedule and task items can be expanded to view additional details about them.

> If you cannot find the object to which a task or schedule is attached, deselect the "Show only standalone tasks/schedules" toggle on the **System Tasks** page to show all tasks and schedules, including the ones that are attached to objects.

Reviewer: This is truly a super-important UX detail, good stuff.

:::

Schedules can also be _paused_ to prevent new tasks to be created from them. They can still be triggered manually while paused. When you un-pause a schedule, it will be triggered immediately.

### Failed tasks

When a task fails, i.e. when the code throws an exception, the task will be retried up to the value configured in [`AUTHENTIK_WORKER__TASK_MAX_RETRIES`](../install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx#authentik_worker__task_max_retries). Tasks that self-reported an error or a warning will not be retried.

Failed tasks will be displayed like any other tasks. Each task can be expanded to show its logs. The logs are split into two parts: "Current execution logs" for the current execution, and "Previous execution logs" for logs from previous executions that happened before a retry was initiated. The information contained in the logs indicate either a transient error (a network connection failed for example), a mis-configuration (wrong password set in the LDAP source for example), or a bug in authentik.

#### Restarting tasks

To restart a task, click the retry arrow next to the task. It will be queued again and picked up by a worker.

:::info

> To retry tasks created from a schedule, we recommend manually triggering the schedule instead of restarting one of its tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To retry tasks created from a schedule, we recommend manually triggering the schedule (click the Run arrow beside the schedule) instead of restarting one of its tasks.
```
